EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE IN THE POLITICS OF KNOWING
Author(s): MIRANDA FRICKER
Source: Metaphilosophy, Vol. 34, No. 1/2 (January 2003), pp. 154-173
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24439230
Accessed: 09-03-2019 04:44 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Metaphilosophy
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003.
 Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford 0X4 2DQ, UK and
 350 Main Street, Maiden, MA 02148, USA
 METAPHILOSOPHY
 Vol. 34, Nos. 1/2, January 2003
 0026-1068
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE IN THE
 POLITICS OF KNOWING
 MIRANDA FRICKER
 ABSTRACT: The dual aim of this article is to reveal and explain a certain
 phenomenon of epistemic injustice as manifested in testimonial practice, and to
 arrive at a characterisation of the anti-prejudicial intellectual virtue that is such as
 to counteract it. This sort of injustice occurs when prejudice on the part of the
 hearer leads to the speaker receiving less credibility than he or she deserves. It is
 suggested that where this phenomenon is systematic it constitutes an important
 form of oppression.
 Keywords: credibility, epistemic injustice, ethical sensibility, historicism, internal
 reasons, oppression, prejudice, social identity, testimonial sensibility, virtue.
 There is a growing sympathy with the idea that epistemology should look
 to ethics for conceptual tools to use in solving traditional epistemological
 problems. My aim here is to identify a role for virtue in accounting for
 both the rationality and the ethics of what must surely be our most basic
 and ubiquitous epistemic practice - the practice of gaining knowledge by
 being told.
 I shall try to argue that a central difficulty in the epistemology of testi
 mony is best handled by reference to a notion that belongs in the first
 instance to ethics, the notion of a sensibility. To this end I shall advance the
 idea of a testimonial sensibility: something that governs our responsive
 ness to the word of others so that, given the sensibility is properly
 educated, we may gain knowledge that p simply by being told that p. Next,
 on the assumption that such a sensibility incorporates a variety of intellec
 tual skills and virtues that govern how much credibility the responsible
 hearer will attribute to different sorts of speakers in different sorts of
 circumstances, I shall identify a phenomenon of epistemic injustice with a
 view to homing in on the particular virtue whose role it is, or should be, to
 pre-empt such injustice. The form of epistemic injustice in question
 happens when a speaker receives the wrong degree of credibility from his
 hearer owing to a certain sort of unintended prejudice on the hearer's part.
 The virtue I shall try to home in on, whose role it is to safeguard against
 such operations of prejudice, embodies a special sort of reflexive critical
 openness to the word of others. The possession of this virtue is presented
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 155
 as an important regulator in the politics of testimonial practice, though I
 shall suggest ultimately that its powers are limited.
 1. Avoiding Intellectualism: The Word of Others
 There is a certain impasse to be detected in a traditional approach to the
 epistemology of testimony.1 When we try to account for what goes on in
 an informal discursive context when someone comes to know that p by an
 interlocutor's telling him that p, it can seem as if we must plump for one
 of two epistemological stories. It can seem as if we must either endorse the
 idea that the hearer gains knowledge just by being uncritically receptive to
 the speaker's word, so long as there are no explicit signals that scepticism
 is in order, or else endorse the idea that the hearer gains knowledge only
 in virtue of rehearsing an appropriate inference - an argument whose
 conclusion licenses believing what he has been told. Thus the choice of
 philosophical pictures can seem to be between sheer uncritical receptive
 ness on the one hand and intellectualist argumentation on the other.
 The shortcoming of each is the allure of the other. The uncritical-recep
 tivity model surely leaves us too open to believing anything people tell us,
 so that, in the absence of signals of untrustworthiness, we are licensed to
 be entirely uncritical.2 Philosophical accounts of testimonial knowledge
 will require the speaker to be both competent and honest with respect to
 her assertion that p. But the experience of everyday life leaves us only too
 aware that human beings cannot systematically be relied on in respect of
 either. Crudely, people often get things wrong, out of innocent error, or
 perhaps because they fancy they know when really they don't. And of
 course people can also succumb to the temptation to mislead deliberately
 - for instance, because it is in their interests to do so. When these two types
 of unreliability are compounded with the obvious fact that such mundane
 things as haste, or misunderstanding the inquirer's purposes, or simple
 carelessness can lead a speaker to mispronounce even on something he is
 perfectly competent and ready to be honest about, it becomes clear that a
 blanket policy of accepting the word of others unmediated by any critical
 filtering would be justificationally lax. The mere absence of explicit
 signals for doubt is not enough to justify a general habit of uncritically
 accepting what other people tell one.
 This shortcoming in the uncritical-receptivity model might draw one's
 sympathies towards the inferential model. As C. A. J. Coady (1992,
 122-23) describes it, this common picture of testimony has it "that all
 knowledge by testimony is indirect or inferential. We know that p when
 1 For an account of how the impasse is merely an artefact of a certain misguided concep
 tion of the philosophical options, see McDowell 1998.
 2 See Elizabeth Fricker 1994, and also 1987, in which she presents a powerful case
 against the idea that we have a "presumptive right" to believe what we are told in the
 absence of countervailing evidence.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 156 MIRANDA FRICKER
 reliably told that p because we make some inference about the reliability
 and sincerity of the witness." In an alternative formulation, John
 McDowell presents the inferentialist model as resting on the following
 assumption:
 If an epistemically satisfactory standing in the space of reasons, with respect to
 a proposition, is mediated rather than immediate, that means the standing is
 constituted by the cogency of an argument that is at its occupant's disposal,
 with the proposition in question as conclusion. (McDowell 1998, 415)
 On either formulation the inferential model is clearly invulnerable to
 accusations of justificational laxity, since it precisely requires that the
 hearer go in for a piece of reasoning that provides a justification for
 believing what she has been told. Inevitably this will usually be some sort
 of inductive argument - for instance, an argument about the individual
 speaker's past reliability on these matters, or about the general reliability
 of people like that about things like this. But the trouble now is that this
 requirement that the hearer avail herself of such an argument seems too
 strong, because too laborious intellectually. It simply does not match our
 everyday phenomenology of informal testimonial exchange, which
 presents learning something by being told as distinctly tm-laborious and
 spontaneous. Surely an epistemic practice as basic to human life as being
 told-things-by-someone-who-knows cannot possibly require all that
 activity at the level of propositional attitudes. If the hearer were genuinely
 supposed to consider (in however rule-of-thumb-ish a way) the likelihood
 that she has been told a truth, that would take at least a moment's hard
 nosed assessment of a sort that simply does not tally with the effortless
 spontaneity characteristic of so much of our everyday testimonial
 exchange.
 The advocate of the inferential model will naturally respond by empha
 sising that the mature hearer will normally rehearse her argument very
 readily and easily. But the more he is at pains to emphasise that such justi
 ficatory argumentation can be so swift as barely to be noticed, and might
 even be altogether unconscious, the more the model strikes one as a piece
 of intellectualism in a tight corner.
 This problem with the inferential model now leads one back again to the
 picture on which the hearer is entitled, other things being equal, to be
 uncritically receptive to what she is told, for this picture of things can now
 be seen to retain something rather strongly in its favour: it more faithfully
 represents the phenomenology of our everyday exchanges. In the absence
 of explicit cues for doubt we do seem simply to accept most of what we
 are told without going in for any active critical assessment. An ordinary
 case might be that, as I make my way hurriedly to the train station, I ask a
 stranger what the time is, he tells me it is 4:30, and I simply, unreflectively,
 accept what he says. This unreflectiveness is underlined by the fact that if
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 157
 I do pick up on some cue for doubt - such as his saying it is 4:30 when I
 already know it cannot be later than four o'clock - then I experience a sort
 of intellectual shift of gear, out of that unreflective mode and into some
 more active one of critical assessment. It is only with this shift of gear that
 I might start to bring some argumentation to bear on the matter of my inter
 locutor's trustworthiness.
 But now we may feel that the intuitive relevance of the evidence of past
 experience in how we are conditioned to receive the word of others has
 gone missing from the ordinary unreflective case. Surely one's knowledge
 of a particular speaker's track record, or one's general background
 assumptions about how likely it is that someone like this will speak the
 truth about something like that, must be somewhere in the offing? If such
 inductive considerations are wholly absent from our unreflective
 exchanges, imposing no constraint whatsoever upon what the hearer is
 entitled to accept, then this does seem to leave our ordinary unreflective
 exchanges in an unacceptable rational vacuum. This thought, then, casts
 the inferentialist model once again in a more favourable light. And so,
 perhaps, the oscillation continues.
 The conclusion I suggest we should draw from these brief considera
 tions is that what is needed to provide a suitable exit from the impasse is a
 picture of informal testimonial exchange that honours the everyday
 phenomenology of unreflective transparency between speaker and hearer,
 while none the less avoiding justificational laxity. We need a positive
 account of how the responsible hearer may spontaneously and non-infer
 entially give an appropriately critical reception to the speaker's word. This
 critical reception must be such that, reliably, when the hearer simply
 accepts what he is told by someone who knows, he is justified in simply
 accepting it. The reception will be one of openness to his interlocutor's
 assertions, yet critical too - the hearer's normal stance needs to find a
 philosophical characterisation such that it constitutes a critical openness to
 the word of others. Such a characterisation will be able to explain how,
 when we are told things, we are indeed able to acquire knowledge, and as
 effortlessly as the phenomenology suggests.
 2. The Responsible Hearer
 McDowell argues for the view that a hearer gains knowledge by testimony
 in virtue of exercising "doxastic responsibility"; and what it is to exercise
 doxastic responsibility is explained in characteristic Sellarsian terms of a
 "sensitivity" to one's place in the "space of reasons." As I understand this
 way of putting things, the idea of a "mediated standing in the space of
 reasons" is the idea of a state - a state of knowledge, for example - that
 has been arrived at by way of an appropriate sensitivity to the reasons for
 and against the proposition. This sensitivity need not manifest itself in the
 making of inferences or arguments - precisely not. As McDowell says:
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 158 MIRANDA FRICKER
 What I am proposing is a different conception of what it is for a standing in the
 space of reasons to be mediated. A standing in the space of reasons can be
 mediated by the rational force of surrounding considerations, in that the
 concept of that standing cannot be applied to a subject who is not responsive to
 that rational force. (McDowell 1998, 430)
 So, if the standing in the space of reasons is "knowing that p," then
 McDowell's proposal is that this knowing that p has as a background
 precondition that the knower has somehow exercised a sensitivity to
 surrounding reasons for and against taking it that p.
 If one accepts this eminently acceptable proposal, then it is natural to
 move to the next question and ask, If not by our usual faculties of argu
 mentation and inference, then by what rational capacity is the hearer able
 to be responsive to the rational force of surrounding reasons? The idea that
 the fulfilment of doxastic responsibility need not require argumentation is
 surely crucial to explaining how testimonial knowledge can be mediated
 yet direct (or, as I am putting it, critical yet non-inferential), but something
 further needs to be said to explain how the hearer does it. If she is not exer
 cising her capacity for inference and argumentation, what rational capac
 ity is she exercising?
 McDowell is minded to say there is nothing to be explained here:
 If we are not to explain the fact that having heard from someone that things are
 thus and so is an epistemic standing by appealing to the strength of an argument
 that things are that way ... do we need some other account of it? I would be
 tempted to maintain that we do not. The idea of knowledge by testimony is that
 if a knower gives intelligible expression to his knowledge, he puts it into the
 public domain, where it can be picked up by those who can understand the
 expression, as long as the opportunity is not closed to them because it would be
 doxastically irresponsible to believe the speaker. That idea seems obvious
 enough to stand on its own epistemological feet; the formulation makes as
 much sense of the idea that knowledge can be transmitted from one subject to
 another as any purported explanation could hope to confer on it. (McDowell
 1998,437-38).
 But I am not sure that nothing more is needed here. One does not have
 to be an advocate of inferentialism to think that something more is called
 for in order to explain how a hearer can count as exercising doxastic
 responsibility if her acceptance of what she has been told is not based on
 any sort of inference or argumentation.
 Let me be clear that the non-satisfaction I am registering is not about
 what doxastically responsible behaviour consists in, as if I were demand
 ing that some rule-like norms or principles be explicated. No doubt there
 are a number of norms general enough to be expressed as guiding princi
 ples of a hearer's doxastic responsibility, but we don't need them in order
 to have a reasonably firm idea of what that responsibility requires. Indeed,
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 159
 those of us sympathetic to virtue-theoretical accounts of responsibility
 might be quite happy with the possibility that there were no such princi
 ples available at all. The question of what constitutes doxastic responsibil
 ity for a hearer, then, is not my worry. The worry is rather that the claim
 that a hearer exercises such responsibility without making any inferences
 leaves one wondering how - by what capacity of reason - she is supposed
 to do it.
 If we look to Coady, we find tacit support for the view that something
 is needed on this score, since he does make a brief suggestion, albeit rather
 too brief to provide more than a pointer. He asserts we have a "learning
 mechanism" that operates critically though non-inferentially in the hearer
 to determine the balance of trust. He says:
 What happens characteristically in the reception of testimony is that the audi
 ence operates a sort of learning mechanism which has certain critical capacities
 built into it. The mechanism may be thought of as partly innate, though modi
 fied by experience, especially in the matter of critical capacities. It is useful to
 invoke the model of a mechanism here since the reception of testimony is
 normally unreflective but is not thereby uncritical. (Coady 1992, 47)
 This seems exactly right, but as it stands the metaphor of a learning mech
 anism remains philosophically and psychologically mysterious. So much
 so that we are not much better off with this idea of a mechanism than we
 were with the non-metaphorical but equally elusive idea of a hearer's
 doxastic responsibility exercised non-inferentially.
 It is time to take stock. What we are looking for is some mode of ratio
 nal sensitivity that yields spontaneous, non-inferential judgements. And
 we are also looking for a mode of rational sensitivity that is learned, and
 learned in an ongoing way so that it is constantly developing and adjusting
 itself in the light of experience and critical reflection. I propose that at this
 point epistemology should turn to ethics for sustenance. For in ethics we
 find a notion that seems to me to fit the bill: the notion of a sensibility. An
 ethical sensibility yields genuine judgements - interpretative judgements,
 such as "That was cowardly," or immediately practical judgements, such
 as "I ought to confess" - yet these judgements are not conclusions to argu
 ments. (They may permit of reconstruction as conclusions to arguments,
 but that is quite another thing. A rational reconstruction of a human prac
 tice does not automatically constitute a proper characterisation of it.) A
 well-trained ethical sensibility will presumably incorporate a range of rele
 vant conceptual and social-perceptual skills, but most importantly it will
 comprise ethical virtues. The central place of virtue explains how a sensi
 bility issues in non-inferential judgements. The virtuous person does not
 have to work out that an act was cowardly, or that the culprit should own
 up; he just sees that this is the case; he just knows. Continuing in this
 broadly Aristotelian vein, we might add that the virtuous person is able to
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 160 MIRANDA FRICKER
 perceive the moral colourations of things spontaneously in this way in
 virtue of his sensibility being formed by a proper ethical training or
 upbringing.
 This idea of ethical training will be important for present purposes, but we
 shall need a more historicist or socially situated conception than we find in
 Aristotle. Let me suggest, then, that we think of the training of a sensibility
 as involving at least two distinct streams of input: social and individual - in
 that order. One develops an ethical sensibility by becoming inculcated with
 a historically and culturally specific way of life - or as Alasdair Maclntyre
 puts it, an ethical "tradition"3 - where this is to be construed as a matter of
 ongoing ethical socialisation. There again, it is from an irreducibly individ
 ual life experience that one gains a particular sentimental education, and in
 that respect the ongoing formation of one's sensibility is something
 distinctly individual. Together these two streams of input - collective and
 individual - continually generate a person's sensibility.
 The deliverances of an individual's sensibility, then, are shaped by a set
 of background interpretative and motivational attitudes, which are in the
 first instance passively inherited from the ethical community but thereafter
 actively reflected upon and lived out in one way or another by the reflec
 tive individual. Ethical responsibility demands that there be an appropriate
 critical link between the traditional moment in which the individual gains
 her ethical socialisation and the experiences life offers her - experiences
 that may sometimes be in tension with her ethical socialisation so as to
 prompt critical reflection on the sensibility which she has otherwise simply
 inherited.4
 This idea of a sensibility gives us a picture of how judgements can be
 rational yet unreflective, critical yet non-inferential. It presents us with a
 rational capacity that is comprised of virtues, that is inculcated in the
 subject through a process of socialisation, and that permits of ongoing
 correction and adjustment in the light of experience and critical reflection.
 Thus we are confronted with a rational capacity unlike anything
 commonly entertained in epistemology, and a version of it seems to me to
 fit the bill as the explanation of how a hearer might be able to give an unre
 flective yet critical reception to the word of another. With this in mind, we
 must now ask what the epistemic analogue of an ethical sensibility would
 be like for testimony. I would like to think that this is not only a worth
 while philosophical question in its own right but also an important ques
 tion at the level of epistemic practice. For if one wants to know how to
 improve one's performance as a receiver of the word of others - if one
 wants to become more responsible and successful as a hearer - then one
 had better know what, if not one's skills of inference and argument, one
 should be trying better to develop.
 3 See Maclntyre 1981, especially chapter 15.
 4 I have tried to develop this theme in my 2000.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 161
 3. Testimonial Sensibility: Critical Openness to the Word of Others
 We are setting our sights on the possibility that responsible hearers in unre
 flective testimonial exchanges exercise a testimonial sensibility. This
 possibility introduces the idea that our responses to the testimony of others
 are learned and internalised through a process of epistemic socialisation -
 a social training of the interpretative and affective attitudes in play when
 we are told things by other people. We might think of it as part of our epis
 temic "second nature."5 Here, again, I suggest there is in the first instance
 a passive social inheritance and then a sometimes-passive-sometimes
 active individual input from the hearer's own experience. Together these
 two streams of input mean that our normal unreflective reception of what
 people tell us is conditioned by a great range of collateral experience. Just
 as the experiences pertinent to the training of ethical virtues are inter
 nalised in the sensibility of the virtuous person, so the body of collective
 and individual testimonial experience is internalised by the responsible or
 virtuous hearer, rendering it immanent in her testimonial sensibility.
 It is through the inductive influence of this body of experience that we
 may learn, reliably enough, to assume trust when and only when it is in
 order. Our perception of speakers and their assertions comes to be
 informed by an inductive conditioning relating to what sorts of people are
 likely to convey the truth about which sorts of subject matters, just as in
 the ethical case our perception of agents and their actions comes to be
 informed by a motivational conditioning relating to what sorts of actions
 are ethically called for in which sorts of situations.
 There is more to be said, however, about what sorts of experiences prop
 erly feed into a testimonial sensibility. They will chiefly be experiences of
 testimonial exchanges had by the individual and the wider community. But
 it must be acknowledged that these experiences can only have a rational
 impact on sensibility under a socially rich description. This is because the
 only way they can have inductive significance is by being such as to support
 or undermine existing habits of response concerning what sorts of people
 are trustworthy in what sorts of situations; which sorts of incentives to
 deceive are likely to be acted upon by which sorts of people; and so on. A
 testimonial sensibility, then, needs to be shaped by collective and individ
 ual experiences of testimonial encounters described in rich, socially specific
 terms relating to the trustworthiness of speakers of different social types in
 different sorts of contexts. These descriptions cannot but involve common
 cultural stereotypes of intellectual authority or its lack, perhaps by way of
 related characteristics, such as openness or inscrutability, steadiness or flak
 iness, rationality or emotionality, dependability or deviousness, logicality
 5 I echo John McDowell's use of this term, which he finds "all but explicit in Aristotle's
 account of how ethical character is formed," and which he extends to apply not simply to
 our ethical upbringing (Aristotle's "practical wisdom") but also, more generally, to our epis
 temic upbringing (McDowell 1994, 84).
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 162 MIRANDA FRICKER
 or intuitiveness.... I use stereotype neutrally, but of course stereotypes are
 fertile ground for prejudice, so it is easy to see how a testimonial sensibil
 ity may come to embody the prejudices of the day. Where a testimonial
 sensibility is informed by stereotypes that are unfair - that is, where they
 are empirically unfounded - the sensibility will be both epistemically and
 ethically defective.
 We shall return to this theme, but for the moment the point is rather that
 such elements of the social imagination as stereotypes of authority can be
 a perfectly proper part of a testimonial sensibility, for the necessary social
 richness of the body of testimonial experience which informs sensibility
 means that stereotypes are positively needed to oil the mechanism of our
 day-to-day exchanges. Hearers need spontaneously to perceive their inter
 locutors in a socially fine-grained way so that they can be appropriately
 responsive to all the subtleties of the interaction. Without this richness of
 social perception, many epistemically relevant cues will be missed.
 Consider, for instance, what complexity there can be in cues indicating
 how far one should interpret an interlocutor as taking seriously what he is
 asserting. Perhaps the hearer sees the speaker as entirely competent in all
 relevant matters, yet still her perception of him has to be responsive to all
 sorts of features of social location and discursive style that would not
 figure in any but the richest of social-psychological descriptions of the
 encounter.
 If these remarks provide a reasonable working idea of which experi
 ences feed into sensibility, is there something further we can say about how
 an individual takes them on in sensibility? Here again the task is to develop
 a parallel with the ethical case. An individual's testimonial sensibility will
 in the first instance be passively inherited. This passivity is justified,
 firstly, for the a priori reason that the body of judgements and attitudes
 which comprise a sensibility constitute the basis from which a hearer's
 doxastic responsibility emerges. And, secondly, for the empirical reason
 that even a minimally successful epistemic community must be operating
 with a broadly functional testimonial sensibility. But once light has
 dawned for a hearer, she will come to find that sometimes her experiences
 of testimonial exchange will be in tension with the deliverances of the
 sensibility she has passively taken on, in which case responsibility requires
 that her sensibility adjust itself to accommodate the new experience.
 This might happen spontaneously, without active critical reflection on
 the part of the hearer, but it is more likely that she will need actively to
 bring critical thought to bear on her internalised habits of hearer response
 in order to shake them up sufficiently to effect the adjustment. If, for
 instance, a hearer is a teenager whose testimonial sensibility has contracted
 the defect of not taking seriously what old people say, and if this teenager
 finds himself one day struck by the veracity of his grandfather's stories of
 the war, he may experience a small epistemic revolution that requires some
 significant deliberative follow-through in terms of how he receives the
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEM1C INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 163
 word of the elderly quite generally. In so far as this teenager is doxastically
 responsible, he will effect an adjustment to his testimonial sensibility
 either directly, by way of a shift of social perception, or indirectly, by way
 of critical reflection. If the adjustment is direct, then he will undergo a
 Gestalt switch in how he perceives elderly speakers so that the adjustment
 to his testimonial sensibility is more or less instantaneous. If it is indirect,
 then active critical reflection on his habits of hearer response will first
 produce some sort of corrective policy external to the hearer's sensibility.
 (Perhaps this teenager disciplines himself when in conversation with the
 elderly, "Don't be dismissive. . . .") Given time, and all being well, such a
 corrective policy will become internalised as an integral part of his sensi
 bility, so that it comes to be implicit in his newly conditioned perception
 of elderly speakers.
 Whether direct or indirect, then, we can see how the responsible
 hearer's sensibility matures and adapts in the light of ongoing testimonial
 experience. Its claim to be a capacity of reason crucially depends on this
 adaptiveness, for otherwise it would be little more than a dead-weight
 social conditioning that looked more like a threat to the justification of a
 hearer's responses than a source of that justification.
 This model for how inductive rationality can be embodied in sensibility
 shows that the making of an explicit inferential step is not the only way
 that the justificatory force of induction can enter into the hearer's reception
 of a speaker's word: an appropriately trained testimonial sensibility
 enables the hearer to respond to the word of another with the sort of criti
 cal openness that is required for a thoroughly effortless sharing of knowl
 edge.
 To sum up this section, then, the idea of a testimonial sensibility has in
 its favour not only that it represents a way out of the impasse with which
 we began (where we were stuck oscillating between the uncritical-recep
 tion model and the inferentialist model of testimonial knowledge) but also
 that it retains those features of each model that explained its attractiveness.
 Testimonial sensibility, as I have characterised it, pictures inductive ratio
 nality as the basic source of justification for hearer response, and this was
 the main thing we found attractive in the inferentialist model. Yet it also
 pictures hearer response in such a way that where knowledge is gained it
 is usually non-inferential. This means that the idea of a testimonial sensi
 bility honours our everyday phenomenology of spontaneity and unreflec
 tiveness, thus incorporating the non-intellectualism we found attractive in
 the uncritical-reception model.
 Perhaps enough has now been said to show that the idea of a testimo
 nial sensibility is able to explain how everyday testimonial knowledge can
 be non-inferential. But more needs to be said about what constitutes such
 a sensibility. I would like to think that introducing the notion opens up
 some new terrain for work of a virtue-ethical kind in exploring which
 virtues are properly incorporated into such a sensibility - work that could
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 164 MIRANDA FRICKER
 be regarded as either replacing or complementing more technical, proba
 bilistic approaches to these matters. My next task here, then, will be to
 home in on one virtue in particular, which - although it is in a certain way
 thoroughly familiar - does not have a name. The role that this virtue has to
 play in testimonial practice comes into view only if we follow through the
 implications of our historicist, socially situated conception of the epistemic
 socialisation that forms testimonial sensibility. More particularly, it comes
 into view if we return to the role of social stereotypes in how a sensibility
 determines habits of hearer response. I have said that such stereotypes,
 where empirically founded, are a perfectly legitimate heuristic and a
 necessary determining factor in how a hearer perceives a speaker. But we
 must also confront the fact that in any actual human society, human soci
 eties being what they are, it is inevitable that such speaker stereotypes are
 susceptible to distortion by the prejudices of the day. Stereotypes inform
 ing testimonial exchange will tend to imitate relations of social power at
 large in the society. Our everyday, face-to-face testimonial encounters
 bring to bear a whole social consciousness in an instant, and this creates a
 deep structural liability to prejudicial dysfunction in our testimonial prac
 tices.
 4. Epistemic Injustice: The Word of Others
 Broadly speaking, prejudicial dysfunction in testimonial practice can be of
 two kinds. Either the prejudice results in the speaker's receiving more cred
 ibility than she rationally deserves - credibility excess - or it results in her
 receiving less credibility than she rationally deserves - credibility deficit.6
 Consider the immediate discursive impact of accent, for instance. Not only
 does a speaker's accent carry a great deal of baggage in terms of how a
 hearer perceives the speaker socially; I would suggest that part and parcel
 of this social perception are implications for how the hearer perceives the
 speaker epistemically. Accent can have a significant impact on how much
 credibility the hearer affords the speaker, especially in a one-off exchange.
 6 Someone might ask how far the idea of a credibility excess or deficit depends on there
 being some exact degree of credibility which the speaker is due. I share Coady's scepticism
 about there being any precise science here, any precise credibility ratio to determine what
 degree of belief the hearer is entitled to. As Coady says, people are not like coins, exhibit
 ing quite general tendencies to be right and honest about things (see Coady 1992, 210). And
 I see no reason to think this difficulty can be made good by building a sensitivity to subject
 matter into one's calculations, for the likelihood of speaker veracity is always dependent on
 which of an indeterminate number of discursive contexts the interlocutors happen to be in
 (including maximally contingent shifts of context that depend, for instance, on whether the
 speaker is in the mood for being undetectably sarcastic, and so on). This dependence on such
 finely differentiated contexts seems not merely to indicate that if there is a precise proba
 bility available then it can hardly be available to the hearer. Rather, it would seem to indi
 cate that there is no such precise probability available at all, and that the matter is in some
 significant degree indeterminate.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 165
 I do not mean that someone's accent is especially likely to lead a hearer,
 even an intensely prejudiced one, simply to disbelieve some perfectly
 believable assertion, or simply to believe some otherwise incredible asser
 tion. Given that it is overwhelmingly in the interests of hearers in general
 to believe what is true and not believe what is false, it would have to be an
 unusual prejudice to be strong enough to have that sort of effect. (We
 should note, however, that social contexts structured by relations of
 systematically unequal social power do have a habit of generating situa
 tions in which a hearer with the greater social power is in a position such
 that it costs him nothing to disbelieve a manifestly believable speaker, as
 one of my examples will demonstrate.)
 More usually, however, power will influence hearer-response in a less
 obvious way. Rather than turning belief into non-belief or vice versa, it
 will surreptitiously raise or lower the hearer's degree of belief, by inflat
 ing or deflating the credibility he affords the speaker. Epistemic trust, like
 other kinds of trust, has an affective7 aspect that is influenced - sometimes
 rightly, sometimes wrongly - by how the hearer perceives the interlocutor.
 Its key affective aspect is a kind of minimal interpretative sympathy with
 the speaker that allows signs of her trustworthiness to be picked up on in
 the hearer's perception of her. Even such a minimal sympathy will be
 signally uneven across differences of social identity and especially where
 those differences of identity are characterised by dramatically unequal
 relations of power. Both of the examples I shall present illustrate how the
 social "otherness" of the speaker is fundamental to the prejudiced recep
 tion their word is given - the hearers re-enact their general social advan
 tage in the reception they give the speaker's word.
 To the examples, then. Both present cases of credibility deficit (rather
 than credibility excess), since that is the phenomenon that most urgently
 calls for the specific anti-prejudicial virtue I aim to identify. My first
 example is drawn from a novel, To Kill a Mockingbird, by Harper Lee
 (1974); the second is drawn from a screenplay, The Talented Mr Ripley, by
 Anthony Minghella (2000).8 I offer the first as an example in which the
 epistemic failings on the part of the hearer (or rather hearers) is clearly
 culpable, the second as an example in which it is plausible to suggest that
 the hearer inflicts the injustice non-culpably. Each presents an instance of
 epistemic injustice in testimony - an instance, then, of testimonial injus
 tice.
 First example: The year is 1935, and the scene a courtroom in
 Maycomb County, Alabama. The defendant is a young black man named
 Tom Robinson. He is charged with raping a white girl, Mayella Ewell,
 whose family's run-down house he passes every day on his way to and
 ' See Jones 1996.
 8 Minghella's screenplay is closely based on Patricia Highsmith's novel, though,
 crucially for present purposes, the character of Marge Sherwood and her relationship with
 Dickie Greenleaf is developed differently.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 166 MIRANDA FRICKER
 from work. It is obvious to the reader, and would be obvious to any rela
 tively unprejudiced person in the courtroom, that Tom Robinson is entirely
 innocent. For Addicus Finch, our politely spoken counsel for the defence,
 has proved beyond doubt that Robinson could not have beaten the Ewell
 girl so as to cause the sort of cuts and bruises she sustained that day,
 because whoever gave her this beating led with his left fist, whereas Tom
 Robinson's left arm is disabled, injured in an accident when he was a boy.
 The trial proceedings present a fairly clear-cut struggle between the power
 of evidence and the power of racial prejudice, with the all-white jury's
 sympathies ultimately succumbing to the latter. But there is a great
 complexity of social meanings at work in determining the jury's percep
 tion of Tom Robinson as a speaker. In a showdown between the word of a
 black man and a white girl, the courtroom air is thick with the do's and
 don'ts of racial politics. Telling the truth here is a minefield for Tom
 Robinson, since if he casts aspersions on the white girl he will be
 perceived as a presumptuous, lying Negro, yet if he does not publicise
 Mayella Ewell's attempt to kiss him (which is what really happened), then
 a guilty verdict is even more nearly assured. (This discursive predicament
 mirrors his practical predicament at the Ewell's house when Mayella
 grabbed him. If he pushes her away, he will be found to have assaulted her;
 yet if he is passive he will equally be found to have assaulted her. So he
 does the most neutral thing he can, which is to run away, though knowing
 all the while that this action too will be taken as a sure sign of guilt.)
 At a pivotal moment during the prosecution's interrogation, Tom
 Robinson makes the mistake of being honest about his motivations for
 stopping off at Mayella Ewell's house as regularly as he did to help her out
 with odd jobs. The scene, like the whole story, is reported from the point
 of view of Scout, Addicus Finch's little daughter, who is secretly survey
 ing the proceedings with her brother Jem from the "Negro gallery." Mr
 Gilmer, the prosecutor, sets him up:
 "Why were you so anxious to do that woman's chores?"
 Tom Robinson hesitated, searching for an answer. "Looked like she didn't have
 nobody to help her, like I says .
 Mr Gilmer smiled grimly at the jury. "You're a mighty good fellow, it seems -
 did all this for not one penny?"
 "Yes suh. I felt right sorry for her, she seemed to try more'n the rest of 'em
 "You felt sorry for her, you felt sorry for her?" Mr Gilmer seemed ready to rise
 to the ceiling.
 The witness realised his mistake and shifted uncomfortably in the chair. But the
 damage was done. Below us, nobody liked Tom Robinson's answer. Mr Gilmer
 paused a long time to let it sink in. (Lee 1974, 201)
 Here the "damage" in question is done to any interpretative sympathy the
 white jury has so far been human enough to feel towards the black defen
 dant. For feeling sorry for someone is a taboo sentiment if you are black
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 167
 and the object of your sympathy is a white person. And the fact that Tom
 Robinson has made the sentiment public raises the stakes in a way that is
 disastrous for justice, disastrous for him. The trial is a contest between the
 word of a black man against that of a white girl, and there are those in the
 jury whose testimonial sensibility is such that the idea that the black man
 is to be trusted and the white girl distrusted is virtually a psychological
 impossibility - Robinson's expressed sympathy for a white girl only rein
 forces that impossibility.
 As it turns out, the members of the jury stick with their prejudiced
 perception of the defendant, formed principally by the racial stereotypes of
 the day. Addicus Finch challenges them to dispense with these stereotypes,
 to dispense with the "assumption - the evil assumption - that all Negroes
 lie, that all Negroes are basically immoral beings, that all Negro men are
 not to be trusted around our women" (Lee 1974, 208). But when it comes
 to the verdict, the jurors go along with the automatic distrust delivered by
 their corrupted testimonial sensibility. They find him guilty. And it is
 important that we are to interpret the novel so that the jurors really do find
 him guilty. That is to say, they do not privately find him innocent but cyni
 cally convict him anyway. They really do fail to do what Finch in his
 summing-up describes as their duty: they fail to believe Tom Robinson.
 Given the evidence put before them, their immovably prejudiced social
 perception of Robinson as a speaker leads at once to a gross epistemic fail
 ure and an appalling ethical failure.
 Second example: It is the 1950s, and we are in Venice. Herbert
 Greenleaf, a rich American industrialist, is visiting, accompanied by a
 private detective he has hired to help solve the mystery of the whereabouts
 of his renegade son, Dickie. Dickie Greenleaf recently got engaged to his
 girlfriend, Marge Sherwood, but subsequently spent a great deal of time
 travelling with their "friend" Tom Ripley - until Dickie mysteriously
 disappeared. Marge is increasingly distrustful of Ripley because he seems
 to be obsessed with Dickie and suspiciously bound up with his strange
 disappearance. She also knows very well that it is unlike Dickie - unreli
 able philanderer though he undoubtedly was - simply to do a bunk, let
 alone to commit suicide, which is the hypothesis Ripley is at pains to
 encourage. Ripley, however, has all along done a successful job of sucking
 up to Greenleaf senior, so Marge is entirely alone in her suspicion - her
 correct suspicion - that Tom has in fact killed Dickie.
 Herbert Greenleaf has just asked Ripley to be as helpful as he can in
 "filling in the blanks" of Dickie's life to Macarron, the private detective,
 and Ripley responds:
 Ripley. I'll try my best, sir. Obviously I'll do anything to help Dickie.
 Marge looks at him in contempt.
 Herbert Greenleaf. This theory, the letter he left for you, the police think that's
 a clear indication he was planning on doing something ... to himself.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 168 MIRANDA FRICKER
 Marge: I just don't believe that!
 Herbert Greenleaf: You don't want to, dear. I'd like to talk to Tom alone -
 perhaps this afternoon? Would you mind? Marge, what a man may say to his
 sweetheart and what he'll admit to another fellow -
 Marge: Such as? (Minghella 2000, 120-21)
 Here Marge is being gently, kindly, sidelined by Greenleaf senior, who
 pathologizes her disbelief that Dickie would kill himself as a sweetheart's
 wishful thinking. He also seems to assume that Marge is generally inno
 cent of the more tawdry facts of Dickie's life, so that his primary attitude
 towards her on the one hand and the-truth-about-Dickie on the other is that
 she needs protection from it. Greenleaf's everyday theory about what a
 man may say to his sweetheart, et cetera - though in itself quite possibly
 true enough - has the effect of undermining Marge as a possessor of
 knowledge about the lover she had been living with for some time.
 Greenleaf is only too aware how little he knows of his son - pathetically
 enthusiastic as he is at the prospect that the private detective might help
 make good this ignorance - and yet he fails to see Marge as the source of
 knowledge about Dickie that she manifestly is.
 This attitude has the knock-on effect that Greenleaf fails to trust one of
 Marge's key reasons for her correct hypothesis that Dickie has died at the
 hands of Ripley. Even when Marge finds hard evidence back at Ripley's
 place, coming across a ring which she had given Dickie and which he had
 sworn never to remove, still she receives no credibility. Ripley's deliberate
 tactic is to dismiss her as "hysterical" - a line he continues to peddle in
 front of Greenleaf in order to get him to share this interpretation. The tactic
 works, not only on Greenleaf but also on her friend Peter Smith-Kingsley,
 so that the result is a collusion of men against Marge's word being taken
 seriously. The theme of knowledge ever to the fore in the dialogue, we at
 one point hear her off-screen, soon after she finds the ring, saying emphat
 ically to the incredulous Greenleaf, "I don't know, I don't know, I just
 know it," and Greenleaf replies with a familiar put-down: "Marge, there's
 female intuition, and then there are facts - ."
 A number of these sorts of exchanges build up to the scene in which
 Marge, being taken back to America, is ushered on to a boat but breaks
 away to lunge at Ripley, saying, "I know it was you - I know it was you,
 Tom. I know it was you. I know you killed Dickie. I know it was you."
 Macarron, the private detective, comes out of the waiting boat to restrain
 her, and the stage direction reads: "Ripley looks at him as if to say: What
 can you do, she's hysterical. Macarron nods, pulls her onto the boat." As
 the viewer is aware, however, Marge was right: she did know; she knew
 Dickie well; and she knew Ripley had killed him. Her suspicions should
 have been listened to; she of all people should have been given some cred
 ibility. But Ripley cynically exploits the gender attitudes of the day so that
 the kindly and well-meaning men around her effectively collude with him
 to make her seem epistemically untrustworthy.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 169
 What both these examples present us with, in their different ways, is a
 case of a hearer failing to correct for one or another sort of prejudice in his
 testimonial sensibility. Both Greenleaf and the members of Maycomb
 County's jury fail to distrust their own distrust9 of the speaker. They fail
 to adjust for the way in which their testimonial sensibility is badly trained.
 In the formal courtroom context of Tom Robinson's trial, they have ample
 opportunity to sense the dissonance between the distrust that their defec
 tive sensibility spontaneously delivers and the trust that attention to the
 evidence ought to inspire. Even if members of the jury were to be forgiven
 for the way their sensibility is saturated with the prejudices of the day,
 they remain starkly culpable in failing to respond appropriately to the new
 testimonial experience afforded by the trial. In the case of Herbert
 Greenleaf, he fails to correct for the way in which his habits of hearer
 response are saturated with the sexist constructions of gender - notably,
 ideas of women's innocence concerning the truths of men, and their need
 to be protected from such truths; ideas of feminine intuitiveness being an
 obstacle to rational judgement; and even ideas of a female susceptibility
 to hysterics.
 But it is not simply a matter of failure properly to accommodate the
 speaker's social identity. In both examples, the hearers fail to adjust for the
 way in which their own social identity affects the testimonial exchange.
 The jury fails to account for the difference it makes to Tom Robinson's
 "performance" as a speaker (in the wide sense of performance, to include
 both what he does and how the audience responds) not only that he is black
 but equally that they are white. What Greenleaf fails to account for in his
 sceptical responses to Marge is the difference it makes to her performance
 not only that she is a woman but also that he is a man. The relation - a rela
 tion of power - between the social identities of hearer and speaker influ
 ence both how the speaker expresses herself and how the hearer responds.
 Our two examples, then, demonstrate that testimonial responsibility
 requires a distinctly reflexive critical awareness. Had Marge shouted her
 accusations in the presence of Mrs Herbert Greenleaf, one speculates that
 she might have received from her some greater degree of credibility. That
 things would have gone differently at Tom Robinson's trial if the members
 of the jury had been black goes without saying.
 Thus we have arrived at the final feature of the anti-prejudicial testimo
 nial virtue we have been looking for: it is essentially reflexive. Its posses
 sion means that the hearer reliably succeeds in correcting for the way
 testimonial performance can be prejudiced by the inter-relation of the
 hearer's social identity and the speaker's social identity. In testimonial
 exchanges, for hearers and speakers alike, no party is neutral - everybody
 has a race, everybody has a gender. What is needed on the part of the
 9 I borrow this formulation from Jones 2002, in which she explores the themes of power
 and credibility specifically concerning astonishing reports.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 170 MIRANDA FRICKER
 hearer, then, in order to avert an epistemic injustice (and in order to serve
 his own epistemic interest in the truth) is a virtue of Reflexive Critical
 Openness. This is the virtue we have been aiming to identify by attending
 to the phenomenon of testimonial injustice.
 5. The Virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness - Historicism
 The virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness is an especially hard virtue to
 achieve at the best of times, inasmuch as prejudice is a powerful visceral
 force, functioning less at the level of propositional attitudes and more at
 the level of the social-imaginative and emotional commitments that colour
 one's perceptions of speakers. (Even if one were only faced with correct
 ing for prejudice at the level of belief, this can still be very hard while
 those beliefs are propped up by motivational attitudes in this way. As
 Christopher Hookway [2001, e.g., 182] has argued, there is the usual room
 for akrasia in the practical business of managing one's epistemic habits.)
 Clearly, however, it is in principle achievable, and the virtue will be an
 integral part of any well-trained testimonial sensibility in so far as the risk
 of prejudice-induced credibility deficit is an inevitable feature of epistemic
 life. The human condition is a social condition, and social relations
 inevitably create space for prejudice.
 Yet, there are circumstances under which the virtue cannot be achieved,
 for it is a notable and ethically significant feature of this virtue that it
 displays a special sort of cultural-historical contingency. In order to
 explain this, let me follow Linda Zagzebski's (1996) definition of virtue
 such that virtues have both a motivational component and a component of
 reliable success in bringing about the end of that motivation. In the case of
 intellectual virtues there will always be a motivation to achieve truth, but
 usually there will also be a more proximal aim to achieve something that
 is conducive to truth - notably here the aim of ensuring that one's levels of
 trust are untainted by prejudice. As a matter of definition, then, the intel
 lectually virtuous subject will be reliably successful in fulfilling that prox
 imal aim of ensuring against prejudice, and she will succeed in this by
 achieving reflexive critical awareness of the prejudicial distortions in her
 existing testimonial sensibility and by correcting for those distortions.
 It must now be acknowledged, however, that the ability to do that is
 dependent upon the cultural-historical setting. A setting in which there is
 little critical awareness of gender is a setting in which no-one is in a posi
 tion to possess the virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness vis-a-vis gender
 prejudice of any subtle kind. While the Herbert Greenleafs of this world
 were always at fault in failing to exhibit the virtue, I would suggest they
 were not culpably at fault until the requisite critical consciousness of
 gender became available to them. They were not culpably at fault until
 they were in a position to know better. Now there will of course be no
 precise answer to the question of at what point a Herbert Greenleaf comes
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 171
 to be in a position where he should know better than to overlook the possi
 bility that Marge was right. But no doubt someone like him will be in that
 position long before he actually lives up to it by taking on board the
 gender-critical insights newly available to him. Thus there will tend to be
 some period of historical transition in which a Herbert Greenleaf, well
 intentioned and paternal as he may remain, moves from innocent fault to
 culpable fault. He lacked the virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness with
 regard to women speakers all along, but the relevant advance in collective
 consciousness will mean that this shortcoming in his epistemic conduct,
 and in the testimonial sensibility behind it, will have become blamewor
 thy.
 This shows that the power to possess the virtue of Reflexive Critical
 Openness depends upon the social-historical context. The case of Herbert
 Greenleaf, as I have characterised it, exemplifies the idea that one cannot
 be blamed for failing to do something one wasn't in a position to have
 reason to do. Essentially this is an instance of the maxim that "ought"
 implies "can," since in our example the "can" part is a matter of whether
 Greenleaf could reasonably be expected to achieve the critical perspective
 on gender that would have given him a reason to cast doubt on his lack of
 trust in Marge's word. More specifically, and more controversially, we
 might think of ourselves as having arrived at an insight into the structure
 of responsibility that is advanced by Bernard Williams (1995, 35) in terms
 of the internality of practical reasons. It would not be right to blame some
 one for an action or omission unless there existed a "sound deliberative
 route" from that person's actual motivational set ("the set of his desires,
 evaluations, attitudes, projects, and so on"). Whatever one thinks about the
 disagreements between so-called internal and external reasons theorists, it
 is worth noting that our intellectual case could not be controversial in
 anything like the way the ethical case is. This is because it could not be
 controversial to presume that all epistemic subjects possess in their moti
 vational set a general motivation to aim at truth, and a fortiori to aim at
 more proximal ends which are in the service of that general motivation
 (such as correcting for prejudice in one's habits of trust, for instance).
 Given this, it is clear that not just Herbert Greenleaf but even the most
 virulent, dyed-in-the-wool sexist version of Herbert Greenleaf possesses a
 motivation (the motivation to truth) from which there might be a sound
 deliberative route to distrusting his lack of trust in Marge. It is not the lack
 of a motivation, then, that explains why Greenleaf "cannot" do what he
 ought - cannot exhibit the appropriate virtue. It is rather the unavailability
 to him of a sound deliberative route from that veridical motivation to the
 conclusion that he should doubt his lack of trust in Marge. There is no such
 sound deliberative route available to him, in as much as the critical concepts
 in which that deliberation would have to be couched are genuinely not yet
 available. On this (perhaps rather charitable) interpretation, then, Greenleaf
 is unlucky, epistemically and morally. His non-culpable inability to exhibit
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 172 MIRANDA FRICKER
 the virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness not only means that he misses out
 on a truth that he is especially interested in acquiring (Marge is right;
 Ripley is Dickie's murderer) but also means he inflicts a significant injus
 tice on Marge. She is treated as a hysterical female who cannot handle the
 truth, someone who deserves protection and sympathy but not epistemic
 trust. If one's rationality is an essential part of one's humanity, then Marge
 is gently undermined in her very humanity.
 Evidently testimonial injustice will tend to imitate the broader struc
 tures of power in society, and where it is systematic we should recognise
 it as a face of oppression. In an essay on the nature of oppression Sandra
 Lee Bartky (1990, 30) quotes Frantz Fanon's notion of "psychic alien
 ation," where the alienation in question consists in "the estrangement of
 separating off a person from some of the essential attributes of person
 hood." I take it that basic forms of epistemic agency, such as functioning
 as an informant on everyday matters, is indeed one of the essential attrib
 utes of personhood - it is part and parcel of being accepted as a compatriot
 in the community of the rational. If this is so, then an epistemic climate in
 which some people suffer systematic testimonial injustice must be
 regarded as seriously defective both epistemically and ethically. It is the
 site not simply of error and frustration, advantage and disadvantage, but of
 a distinctively epistemic kind of oppression. We have seen that the virtue
 of Reflexive Critical Openness (and doubtless many other virtues besides)
 has an important role in combating this sort of oppression. But as some
 thing possessed of mere individuals whose social-historical situation can
 deprive them of the very resources they need in order to attain the virtue,
 its anti-oppressive power remains hostage to the broader social structures
 in which our testimonial practices must take place.
 School of Philosophy
 Birkbeck College
 University of London
 Malet Street
 London WC1E 7HX
 United Kingdom
 mfricker@ philosophy, bbk. ac. uk
 References
 Bartky, Sandra Lee. 1990. "On Psychological Oppression." In Femininity
 and Domination: Studies in the Phenomenology of Oppression, 22-32.
 London: Routledge.
 Coady, C. A. J. 1992. Testimony: A Philosophical Study. Oxford:
 Clarendon Press.
 Fricker, Elizabeth. 1987. "The Epistemology of Testimony." Proceedings
 of the Aristotelian Society (supplementary volume) 61: 57-83.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE 173
 — —. 1994. "Against Gullibility." In Knowing from Words, edited by B.
 K. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
 Fricker, Miranda. 2000. "Confidence and Irony." In Morality, Reflection,
 and Ideology, edited by E. Harcourt, 87-112. Oxford: Oxford
 University Press.
 Jones, Karen. 1996. "Trust as an Affective Attitude." Ethics 107: 4—25.
 . 2002. "The Politics of Credibility." In A Mind of One's Own:
 Feminist Essays on Reason and Objectivity, edited by L. Antony and C.
 Witt, 154—76. Boulder, Col.: Westview Press.
 Lee, Harper. 1974. To Kill A Mockingbird. London: Pan Books.
 Hookway, Christopher. 2001. "Epistemic Akrasia and Epistemic Virtue."
 In Virtue Epistemology: Essays on Epistemic Virtue and Responsibility,
 edited by A. Fairweather and L. Zagzebski, 178-99. Oxford: Oxford
 University Press.
 Maclntyre, Alasdair. 1981. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. London:
 Duckworth.
 McDowell, John. 1994. Mind and World. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
 University Press.
 . 1998. "Knowledge by Hearsay." In Meaning, Knowledge, and
 Reality, essay 19. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
 Minghella, Anthony. 2000. The Talented Mr Ripley. London: Methuen.
 Williams, Bernard. 1995. "Internal Reasons and the Obscurity of Blame."
 In Making Sense of Humanity and Other Philosophical Papers, chapter
 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Zagzebski, Linda. 1996. Virtues of the Mind: An Inquiry into the Nature of
 Virtue and the Ethical Foundations of Knowledge. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press.
 © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003
This content downloaded from 147.126.1.145 on Sat, 09 Mar 2019 04:44:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms